Moritz review (#110)
taxprofiler/taxpasta: paper/paper.md

      affiliation: 1
    - name: Maxime Borry
      orcid: 0000-0001-9140-7559
      affiliation: "2, 3"
    - name: Sofia Stamouli
      orcid: 0009-0006-0893-3771
      affiliation: 4
    - name: James A. Fellows Yates
      orcid: 0000-0001-5585-6277
      affiliation: "2, 3, 5"
affiliations:
    - name: Unseen Bio ApS, Fruebjergvej 3, 2100 Copenhagen, Denmark
      index: 1
    - name: Microbiome Sciences Group, Department of Archaeogenetics, Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology, Deutscher Platz 6, 04103 Leipzig, Germany
      index: 2
    - name: Associated Research Group of Archaeogenetics, Leibniz Institute for Natural Product Research and Infection Biology Hans Knöll Institute, Adolf-Reichwein-Straße 23, 07745 Jena, Germany
      index: 3
    - name: Department of Microbiology, Tumor and Cell Biology, Karolinska Institute, Solnavägen 1, 171 77 Solna, Sweden
      index: 4
    - name: Department of Paleobiotechnology, Leibniz Institute for Natural Product Research and Infection Biology Hans Knöll Institute, Adolf-Reichwein-Straße 23, 07745 Jena, Germany
      index: 5

date: 2023-05-29
bibliography: paper.bib
---

# Summary

> Metagenomic analysis is chiefly concerned with untargeted genetic

Reviewer: As a non native english reader, I had to google this. Maybe rephrase to something like this ?
```suggestion
One of the main goal of metagenomics is the untargeted genetic
```

output, that, at a minimum, contains taxonomic identifiers and their relative
abundances as integer counts. It can also be used to aggregate profiles across
samples from the same profiler and merge them into a single, standardised table.
Having a singular format facilitates downstream analyses and comparisons.
TAXPASTA is not the first tool to attempt standardising metagenomic profiles,
but it is by far the most comprehensive in terms of supported profilers and
output formats.

There exists an initiative to benchmark and compare profilers, as well as
provide guidance on their fitness for purpose
[@sczyrba_critical_2017; @meyer_critical_2022]. For that purpose, the
Open-community Profiling Assessment tooL (OPAL) [@meyer_assessing_2019] was
developed. Creating a community wide assessment faced many of the challenges
presented here, however, the chosen solution was to mandate a single output
format[^8] for all profilers participating in the challenge. Furthermore, OPAL
is an integrated tool performing assessment and visualization, whereas TAXPASTA
follows the UNIX philosophy[^9] of doing one thing well, thus allowing for

> composition with other tools.

Author: > What do you mean by composition with other tools? I thought the idea of that part of the UNIX philosophy was about piping?

That was my thinking, too. Composing analysis workflows by combining different tools. I'm happy to use different wording.

> composition with other tools.

Author: > Note I wouldn't have a line break between the OPAL and BIOM formats, as it's the same 'section' of the paper.

You don't think it's a separate paragraph?

> composition with other tools.

Reviewer 2: > That was my thinking, too. Composing analysis workflows by combining different tools. I'm happy to use different wording.

It depends what you mean with composition with other tools. We do follow the unix philosphy of do one thing well, but we don't pipe so I would remove the `thus <...> other tools` bit

> You don't think it's a separate paragraph?

Without subheaders (which aren't really wanted in JOSS papers AFAICS), to me that's the section were we compare with other similar tools/formats (biom has it's own CLI IIRC). But this is me being nit picky, fine if you prefer separate.

> composition with other tools.

Author: @jfy133 do you think that we **should** allow for streaming output such that piping becomes possible? It would be fairly straight forward to allow for this.

> composition with other tools.

Reviewer 2: I guess you could for stdout piping although I don't really see the utility much unless the output is in long format (wide you would lose the header from the output from merge)... And even then I can't really think of when you would use it in an analysis workflow...

I can't see how you would implement it for stdin though as you wouldn't have the sample ID info that in most cases is stored in the file name

But if it would take you 20 minutes I guess why not (??) But any longer would not be worth it

> composition with other tools.

Author: I have adjusted the sentence for now, but it's definitely something we can consider.

[^8]: <https://github.com/bioboxes/rfc/tree/master/data-format>
[^9]: <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Unix_philosophy#Origin>

The BIOM format [@mcdonald_biological_2012] was created with a similar intention
of standardising a storage format for microbiome analyses. However, transforming
metagenomic profiles into that format was entirely left up to the user. The
format also is not easily loadable into spreadsheet software, and external
libraries are required for loading the format into data analysis languages such
as R. The QIIME™2 _next-generation microbiome bioinformatics platform_
[@bolyen_reproducible_2019] also maintains internally consistent formats for
storing and processing metagenomic data that new tools can plug into, however
this suite of software is aimed mostly at 16S amplicon data [@cite], and thus

> often does have as much support or awareness in 'shotgun' sequencing [@cite]

Reviewer 2: For the first citation, I think you can just cite the QIIME1 and QIIME2 papers. They don't mention metagenomics (or rather in the QIIME2 they reference 'inital support for'. For the second, it's hard to cite a non-existance of something... so I think just the two QIIME papers or maybe a link to the docs would be suffient

metagenomic studies . While some of the taxonomic profilers also come with
scripts to convert their output into another format and/or merge multiple
profiles into a single table, such as the Krakentools companion
package[@lu_metagenome_2022], these are often focused on the specific tool or

> family of tools.

Reviewer 2: > thus requiring the user to learn additional tool-specific interfaces.

as in you have to learn the interface of another tool that is only specific to that specific profiler (if that mnakes sense?)

planned, and detailed documentation for community contributions is
provided[^10].

[^10]: <https://taxpasta.readthedocs.io/en/latest/contributing/supporting_new_profiler/>

For maximum compatibility, TAXPASTA offers a wide range of familiar output file
formats, such as text-based, tabular formats (CSV[^1], TSV[^2]), spreadsheets
(ODS[^3], XLSX[^4]), optimized binary formats (Apache Arrow[^5] and
Parquet[^6]), and the HDF5-based[^7] BIOM format [@mcdonald_biological_2012].
We hope that this will let researchers plug and play TAXPASTA into their
existing analysis workflows in a wide range of settings.

[^1]: <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Comma-separated_values>
[^2]: <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tab-separated_values>
[^3]: <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/OpenDocument>
[^4]: <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Office_Open_XML>
[^5]: <https://arrow.apache.org/>
[^6]: <https://parquet.apache.org/>
[^7]: <https://www.hdfgroup.org/solutions/hdf5/>

# Acknowledgements

SS was supported by "Rapid establishment of comprehensive laboratory pandemic
preparedness – RAPID-SEQ" (awarded to Prof. Jan Albert). MB and JAFY were

> supported by the Max Planck Society. JAFY received funding from the Werner

Reviewer 2: Need to check if @maxibor is also supported by the WSS Palaeobiotech project and/or the microverse EXC

Reviewer: I made a suggestion below

Siemens-Stiftung ("Paleobiotechnology", awarded to Prof. Pierre Stallforth and

> Prof. Christina Warinner).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Prof. Christina Warinner), and MB received funding from the Balance of Microverse
Cluster of Excellence (awared to Prof. Christina Warinner).
```

Reviewer 2: Isn't tehre a full version with some ID...?

from AMDirT: 

> M.B. and A.H. were supported under Germany’s Excellence Strategy EXC 2051 (Project-ID 390713860, “Bal-
ance of the Microverse”).

Reviewer: I updated it, but looks like it isn't always necessary
